# What are Effects?

Imagine there's a circle surrounding you, represent a boundary (don't worry about the size; you have permission to resize your imaginary boundary as needed). Inside this boundary are things that you have control over in your life; things that are completely reliable and predictable, as much as that is possible. For example, you know how your toaster works, and its idiosyncrasies. Your stove, dishwasher, washing machine, shower---all these are under your control, and you can expect consistent and predictable results when you use them. You could stay in your house just using these devices, getting groceries delivered and never leaving. You would always know how things work and nothing would change. 

This becomes boring. We get stimulus and grow by connecting with the outside world, where things are unpredictable. The world outside the circle.

When you interact with a person, they are outside your circle of certainty, and you can't anticipate what will happen. If you say "hello" to someone they may respond pleasantly, neutrally or angrily, depending on their current situation and mood. If you ask someone the time of day, they might refer to a non-digital wristwatch (possibly not very accurate), a phone (probably quite accurate), or they may have no timepiece at all, or are too much in a hurry to tell you the time. They might just give you the time, but perhaps they want to talk---so you don't know how *long* it will take to get the time, and after you get it, it might no longer be usable.

Consider a more complex example. You are running a small storage company and you hire someone to store and fetch items for you. When you ask for a stored item, you're not sure how long it will take: the person might be on a break or moving slowly that day, the item might be near or far in the warehouse, or the person might already have a significant list of tasks to complete before they can get to your request. It's also possible that the item might not be there.  There are a number of degrees of unpredictability, and by knowing what they are you can compensate for them in various ways. If you just ignore these unpredictability factors, as we have traditionally done in programming, you can't compensate for them.

*Effects* are these unpredictability factors. When you call a function which is outside your circle of certainty, you initiate an operation that has unpredictable results; i.e. a function that may produce effects. If we know what these effects are, we can work with them to create a more reliable program. It doesn't end with reliability, though. If a system knows what the effects are for a particular function, it can provide other useful facilities.

One kind of unpredictability that we *have* started to pay attention to is errors. As you cannot predict when an error will occur, these are a type of effect.